[MUSIC]
Good afternoon.
We are here today with Professor
Neil Ferguson director of J-Idea,
talking about the current
Corona virus outbreak.
Welcome.
Thank you for
taking the time to speak with us.
Would you be able to give
us an update on the current
estimates that you're
working on with your team?
>> So the main things we're
working on currently are trying
to get a better handle on really
how lethal this virus is,
what threat it poses to
the human population.
It's a difficult thing
to do in an epidemic,
because just simply looking at
how many people have died so
far, this is how many cases there are,
tells you very little.
It takes quite a long time often for
somebody people from being diagnosed as
a case to actually worry whether
we know they're going to live or
survive the infection.
So we're trying to correct for
those factors in terms of look at
the overall scale of the epidemic.
We're going to kind of firmer estimates.
What we can say is surveillance ongoing
in China is we're probably picking up
you think of all infections out
there being a kind of pyramid.
It picks up the top of the pyramid,
the most severe infection.
We think probably 10% or
less of all infections in China
are being detected at the current time.
The next tier down is really
what's been detected overseas.
With there we think sensitivity
is somewhat higher, but
still we may be only detecting maybe
a quarter of all infections of that level.
Lots of people will be entering
in that borders are porous,
countries won't be detecting
every case coming in.
>> Would you be able to say anything about
forward projections of where the current
outbreak is going?
>> Well, in terms of where we
think the current outbreak has
got to in terms of scale.
We estimate that maybe up to 50,000 new
infections a day occurring in China,
which is obviously much larger than
the official case numbers, and
it's going up all the time.
So the forward projections depend really
on the effectiveness of control measures.
We think the epidemic is roughly doubling
in size about every five days at
the current time.
It's hard to evaluate how
effective controls are, but
there's limited evidence
of its slowing in China.
Under that scenario, with the epidemic
would really follow a natural course
probably peak in its epicenter,
Wuhan in around a month's time.
Some uncertainty around that,
and then maybe a month or
two later in the whole of China.
The rest of the world will see
epidemics at various times after that,
depending on how well connected they
are have been in the past few weeks.
So many travelers come to them
who infected from China itself.
As to the overall effectiveness
of control measures,
it's hard to evaluate if there's a lot
of community transmission going on.
We think there probably is,
it will be very hard to control this
epidemic in the same way, as for
instance we controlled the SARS
epidemic some 15, 20 years ago.
>> Would you be able to explain how
the mathematical modeling that your
team is doing can inform policy and
government response?
>> Yeah, so statistical and
mathematical analysis of epidemic
data has quite a long history.
And it's really been come quite
established within the policy framework
obviously making framework used
particularly in the UK, but
a bit further afield.
And that's because often what we have is
very noisy and limited data in early in
an outbreak, and we want to be able to get
the most information from that possible.
So advanced kind of statistical modeling,
and
then later can mechanistic transmission
modeling can be useful in doing that.
So simple questions we try to answer
is how transmissible is a new pathogen?
How long has it been circulating?
How much occasion cases are always
underestimated in every epidemic and
surveillance is never 100% perfect.
So how large is the real epidemic?
And then critically important
to how people respond is is how
severe a threat does this
pose to human health?
>> Would you be able to explain
a little bit about the uncertainty
ranges around the estimates
that you report?
>> So uncertainty is always
high early in a epidemic,
particularly of a disease
we've never seen before.
We don't know a thing,
critical things like how long it takes
from when somebody's infected
to when they develop symptoms,
something called incubation period we
don't have transmissible diseases.
So we try to estimate these things
from quite limited data, and
the limited data means that there's always
uncertainty in estimates which we try to
characterize using state-of-the-art
statistical methods.
So often we will quote something,
like we think every case generates 2.6
other cases on average,
something called the reproduction number.
There will be a range around that might
vary from anywhere between 2.1 up to
3.3 or something.
And that captures how much we
know about that information,
that particular parameter of interest.
>> And then with that uncertainty range
how useful is there to inform policies and
governments?
>> So generally policymakers would
like everything to be certain.
So handling uncertainty is a challenge.
I think the uncertainty range tells them
what confidence we have in the estimate,
if we have calculated correctly.
So if we for instance say, well, the case
fatality ratio, the proportion of people
who might die in an outbreak varies,
could be anywhere from one in 1,000,
the one in ten that's not
a terribly informative estimate.
If we can say precisely the estimate is
1% case fatality, 1% of people will die.
It could be half a percent,
it could be 2%.
That's a much more useful estimate.
>> And do you have any suggestions as to
what the most efficient interventions
would be at the moment for
either China or internationally?
>> Unfortunately for
this virus we have limited options for
interventions at the current time.
We have no vaccine, their vaccines
are rapidly being developed and
will take months, if not years to develop.
Some testing of antiviral treatments,
existing drugs being repurposed to see if
they work in infections in these cases.
The other measures we have to draw
upon are what are called Public Health
intervention.
So identifying as many cases as possible,
as early as possible in their disease and
isolating them is how we managed to
control for instance the SARS outbreak.
And genetically quite similar
virus to this new virus.
Whether those measures will be
affecting as effective in this case
remains to be seen.
This virus has a much wider
range of severity of symptoms.
Quite a lot of people being infected may
just have quite mild respiratory disease
might not even seek healthcare for it.
If those people
are transmitting then it will
be very hard to stop transmission overall.
So within the next few weeks
will really tell us about
the likelihood of control
measures working.
So in terms of interventions,
the Chinese have been throwing everything
they can at this outbreak for
the last 32 weeks.
In terms of what might work that
critically depends on who is transmitting
infection, and
whether the people who are responsible for
most onward transmission are being
identified and isolated are early enough.
The Chinese are currently focusing
on identifying severe cases and
isolating those, it's unclear whether
the mild cases left in the community.
And we think that's the majority of cases
are still sustaining the outbreak or not.
We'll know more in the next
couple of weeks at the moment.
We can't see much evidence of
the epidemic slowing down.
>> There have been few facilities
outside mainland China.
Would you be able to explain why that is,
why we see their difference with the case
the fatalities that we see in China.
>> So looking at the severity of
an epidemic, working out how many
people might eventually die from it,
is very challenging.
There were delays quite often long delays
from when somebody is diagnosed with
an affection, and
may be reported in the media, for instance
in Thailand or Japan or Hong Kong.
And when we finally know what the outcome
of that case is, people will persevere,
cases will be intensive care,
maybe four weeks.
We think the delay from when
somebody is developed symptoms
to when they might dies is as long as
20 days or longer, three weeks or so.
So the fact we haven't seen
many deaths in travelers.
We've seen two so far,
cases detective outside mainland
China is not terribly reassuring.
We wouldn't have expected
to see very many so
far because of those delays in the system.
What we're trying to do now is account for
those delays and do an accurate estimate
of how lethal we think this virus is.
>> How worried are you about
this current outbreak?
The outbreak is clearly of concern.
It's probably the most major, we call
it emerging infectious disease event.
The world has seen since least since
the pandemic influenza in 2009 and
maybe since the SARS outbreak in 2003.
So we don't fully know enough to be
able to estimate the full scale of
disease burden, we call it,
which will affect the human population.
How many people will die, but
it's something that certainly governments
need to prepare for urgently in terms of
ramping up health system preparedness.
And in particular undertaking rapid
research to try to develop treatments
which can reduce potentially
fatality in severe cases of disease.
>> How is the work that you do funded?
>> So the funding for the work we do
here comes from a number of sources.
We are very fortunate to have
generous institute funding from
Community Jamil to fund our work,
not just on responding to outbreaks.
But much broader work on how the world
responds to other forms of health crisis
due to climate change and the like.
We then receive a lot of research funding
from individual research funders,
and so within J-Idea have the MRC Center
for Global Infectious Disease Analysis.
Which has generous funding from
the UK Medical Research Council,
received also a lot of funding
from other funders as well.
>> Thank you for
taking the time to speak to us today.
>> It's a pleasure.
[MUSIC]